On January 1 , 1533 , Michael Angelo, then fifty-seven years old, writes
from Florence to Tommaso de' Cavalieri, a youth of noble Roman family,
art of navigating the sea of your potent genius, that genius will
nevertheless excuse me, and neither despise my inequality, nor demand
alone in everything can in nothing find its counterpart. Wherefore your
lordship, _the only light in our age vouchsafed to this worlds_ having
hand. If, therefore, this or that in the works which I hope and promise
to execute should happen to please you, I should call that work, not
been reported to me--I have given your lordship satisfaction in one
thing or another, I will make a gift to you of my present and of all
unable to recall the past, in order to serve you so much the longer,
instead of having only the future, which cannot be long, since I am all
not my letter, for my pen cannot approach the expression of my good
will."[ 3 ]
Cavalieri writes to Michael Angelo that he regards himself as born
anew since he has come to know the Master; who replies, "I for my part
earth, if your letters had not brought me the persuasion that your
lordship accepts with favour certain of my works." And in a letter of
Messer Tommaso, with the words: "I believe _I should instantly fall
down dead_ if he were no longer in my thoughts."[ 4 ]
Michael Angelo plays upon his friend's surname as Shakespeare plays
upon his friend's Christian name. These are the last lines of the

   "Se vint' e pres' i' debb' esser beato,
    Resto prigion d'un _Cavalier_ armato."

     No marvel if alone and bare I go
     An armed knight's captive and slave confessed."

In other sonnets the tone is no less passionate than Shakespeare's

    "More tenderly perchance than is my due,
     The flames of holy worship, nor denies
     The grace reserved for those who humbly sue.
     Let time stand still, and let noon's chariot stay;
     Fixed be that moment on the dial of heaven!
     Clasp in these yearning arms and keep for aye
     My heart's loved lord to me desertless given."[ 5 ]

In comparison with Cavalieri, Michael Angelo could with justice call
that Shakespeare was not really old at the time when the Sonnets were
written, a proof of their conventional and unreal character. But this
eighteen, Shakespeare was in effect old, with his sixteen additional
years and all his experience of life. And if we are right in assigning
then reached the age of thirty-seven, an age at which (among his
contemporaries) Drayton in his _Idea_ dwells quite in the same spirit
aptly pointed out, Byron in his swan-song uses expressions about
himself which might have been copied from Shakespeare's seventy-third

    "That time of year thou mayst in me behold
     Upon those boughs which shake against the cold
     Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang."
Byron thus expresses himself:--

       The flowers and fruits of love are gone,
     The worm, the canker and the grief

In Shakespeare we read:--
    "In me thou seest _the glowing of such fire_
     That on the ashes of his youth doth lie
     Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by."


    "_The fire that on my bosom preys_
     No torch is kindled at its blaze--
       _A funeral pile_"
Thus both poets liken themselves, at this comparatively early age, to
the wintry woods with their yellowing leaves, and without blossom,
glows in their soul to a solitary flame which finds no nourishment from
without. The ashes of my youth become its death-bed, says Shakespeare.

Nor is it possible to conclude, as Schuck does, from the conventional
verbal identity with a passage in Sidney's _Arcadia_--that they are
quite devoid of relation to the poet's own life.
In short, the elements of temporary fashion and convention which appear
in the Sonnets in no way prove that they were not genuine expressions

They lay bare to us a side of his character which does not appear in
towards self-surrender in love and idolatry, and with a corresponding,
though less excessive, yearning to be loved.
We learn from the Sonnets to what a degree Shakespeare was oppressed
and tormented by his sense of the contempt in which the actor's calling
ancient Judea for whoever disguised himself in the garments of the
other sex, and finally the age-old hatred of Christianity for theatres
of thought had been handed down from generation to generation, and, as
Puritanism grew in strength and gained the upper hand, had begotten a
as Shakespeare's could not but suffer keenly. He was not regarded as
a poet who now and then acted, but as an actor who now and then wrote
had no civic status. Hence his complaint, in Sonnet xxix., of being "in
disgrace with fortune and men's eyes." Hence, in Sonnet xxxvi., his
their friendship:--

     Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame:
     Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
     But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
     As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report."
The bitter complaint in Sonnet lxxii. seems rather to refer to the
writer's situation as a dramatist:--

    "For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,

The melancholy which fills Sonnet cx. is occasioned by the writer's

    "Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
     Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
     Made old offences of affections new:
     Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
     These blenches gave my heart another youth,

Hence, finally, his reproach to Fortune, in Sonnet cxi., that she did
breeds":--

     And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
     To what it works in, like the dyer's hand."
We must bear in mind this continual writhing under the prejudice
against his calling and his art, and this indignation at the injustice
classes, if we would understand the high pressure of Shakespeare's
feelings towards the noble youth who had approached him full of the
of the young for intellectual superiority. William Herbert, with his
beauty and his personal charm, must have come to him like a very angel
was cast. He was a living witness to the fact that Shakespeare was not
condemned to seek the applause of the multitude alone, but could win
and almost passionate friendship which placed him on an equal footing
with the bearer of an ancient name. Pembroke's great beauty no doubt
It is very probable, too, that the young aristocrat, according to the
fashion of the times, made the poet his debtor for solider benefactions
painful the situation in which he was placed by the intrigue between
his mistress and his friend.[ 7 ].
In any case, the affection with which Pembroke inspired
Shakespeare--the passionate attachment, leading even to jealousy of
but an erotic fervour such as we never find in our century manifested
between man and man. Note such an expression as this in Sonnet cx.:--
    "Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
     Even to thy pure and most most loving breast."
This exactly corresponds to Michael Angelo's recently-quoted desire to
"clasp in his yearning arms his heart's loved lord." Or observe such a

    "So are you to my thoughts as food to life."
We have here an exact counterpart to the following expressions in a
letter from Michael Angelo to Cavalieri, dated July 1533 : "I would far
body alone, than your name, which sustains both body and soul, filling
both with such happiness that I can feel neither care nor fear of death

The passionate fervour of this friendship on the Platonic model is
on the part of the elder friend towards the younger, which, in these
two supreme geniuses, affects the modern reader painfully. Each had put
strange it seems to find Shakespeare calling himself young Herbert's
"slave," and assuring him that his time, more precious than that of
him wait or summon him to his side as his caprice and fancy dictate.
In Sonnet lviii. he speaks of "that God who made me first your slave."

    "Being _your slave_, what should I do but tend
     I have no precious time at all to spend,
     Nor services to do, till you require.
     Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
     Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
     Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
     Where you may be, or your affairs suppose;
     Save, where you are how happy you make those."

they were scarcely worth his friend's notice, so does Shakespeare
sometimes speak of his verses. In Sonnet xxxii. he begs his friends to

    "And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
     Exceeded by the height of happier men."

between the friends. Shakespeare then repeatedly promises so to blacken
himself that his friend shall reap, not shame, but honour, from his

    "With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
     Of faults concealed wherein I am attainted,
     That thou, in losing me, shalt win much glory."
Sonnet lxxxix. is still more strongly worded:--

     To set a form upon desired change,
     As I'll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,
     Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
     Thy sweet-beloved name no more shall dwell,
     And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
        For thee, against myself I'll vow debate,

We are positively surprised when, in a single passage, in Sonnet lxii.,
beyond the first half of the Sonnet; in the second half this self-love
is already regarded as a sin, and Shakespeare humbly effaces himself
Sonnets (lv. and lxxxi.) in which the poet confidently predicts the
immortality of these his utterances. It is true that Shakespeare is
and it is simply as records of his friend's beauty and amiability that
his verses are to be preserved through all ages to come. But no poet
these lines in Sonnet lv.:--
